Ferroelectric domain nucleation and switching pathways in hafnium oxide.
Sebastian Calderon V1, Samantha T. Jaszewski2, Kyle P. Kelley3, Jon F. Ihlefeld2,4, and Elizabeth
Dickey1
1
 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213, USA
2
 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia 22904, USA
3
 Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN
37831, USA
4
 Charles L. Brown Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Charlottesville,
Virginia 22904, USA


Nanoscale ferroelectrics that can be integrated into microelectronic fabrication processes are
highly desirable for low-power computing and non-volatile memory devices. However, scalable
novel ferroelectric materials, such as hafnium oxide (HfO2), remain in a state of development, and
a clear understanding of the effects of relevant compositional and processing parameters to control
their ferroelectric properties and the actual polarization switching mechanisms are still under
investigation. One key fundamental knowledge gap is the polarization switching pathway in
ferroelectric hafnia. To further our fundamental understanding of domain nucleation and
switching, we have studied polarization switching pathways in HfO 2-x thin films in real-time at the
atomic scale using transmission electron microscopy. We employed differential phase contrast
imaging that allows for the acquisition of both hafnium and oxygen atomic column signals and
facilitates the observation of relative movement of atomic columns between both sublattices. Our
results demonstrate that the switching pathway involves a transient tetragonal-like local structure,
as oxygen ions shift in locations and remain within their parent hafnium polyhedra.

Since the discovery of ferroelectricity in HfO2-based thin films1, intensive research has been
concentrated on understanding the phase stabilizing mechanisms and origin of ferroelectric
behavior in these materials. While the stabilizing mechanisms are becoming clearer, the
transformations allowing for polarization reversal remain largely experimentally unknown. HfO 2
thin films have been shown to co-exist in different crystalline structures, including a
thermodynamically stable monoclinic P21/c phase, a tetragonal P42/nmc phase, and a polar
orthorhombic Pca21 phase. More recently, an antipolar orthorhombic phase has been also
demonstrated2, where the arrangement of oppositely polarized Pca21 orthorhombic unit-cells is
evidenced when observed along the [100] zone axis, which doubles the unit cell and leads to the
Pbca symmetry. Ferroelectricity in HfO2 compounds is associated with the orthorhombic phases
and is caused by the ability of oxygen ions to move in the structure relative to the hafnium
sublattice, which occurs either in the polar or antipolar phases. Figure 1A shows schematically
two polar orthorhombic Pca21 unit cells viewed along the [100] direction with inverted
polarization. The oxygen O1 ions are positioned on a plane that is equidistant from the adjacent
hafnium ion planes in the [001] direction. The O2 ions, however, are displaced toward one of the
hafnium ion planes, which leads to the non-centrosymmetric structure. The resulting polarization
magnitude and direction are assigned by calculating the polarization from a centrosymmetric
reference phase, based on the modern theory of polarization 3, as described in the methods section.
From this theory, it is important to note that the polarization , both sign and magnitude, can change
depending on the switching pathways or the centrosymmetric phase used for the calculation of the
polarization, as shown in Figure S1 (see supplementary information)4,5.

In traditionally studied perovskite ferroelectrics, such ambiguity does not exist. The switching
pathways have been explicitly identified, mainly because the ion responsible for switching the
polarization is only minimally displaced within the polyhedra defined by the surrounding cations
and anions. However, in novel ferroelectrics such as HfO2, Hf1-xZrxO2 (HZO), Al1-xBxN (AlBN),
Al1-xScxN (AlScN), and Zn1-xMgxO (ZMO) the switching mechanisms are still under investigation.
Recent research from Calderon et al.6 experimentally demonstrated the formation of an antipolar
arrangement of wurtzite AlBN during domain nucleation and switching via in-situ scanning
transmission electron microscopy (STEM), providing new insight into the polarization reversal
mechanisms in wurtzites.

The switching pathways in fluorite structured HfO2, HZO, and ZrO2 have been studied
theoretically and have been shown to be complex and depend on the strain state of the films,
vacancies, type of dopants, etc. Several pathways for polarization inversion have been proposed
by first-principles calculation and nudged elastic band simulations 4,5,7–10. These pathways are
differentiated by the displacements of the oxygen ions relative to the hafnium sublattice and by the
particular transient non-polar centrosymmetric state traversed during switching. These transient
states are a tetragonal P42/nmc phase or an orthorhombic Pbcm phase. Polarization inversion
through these two transient states have been reported to have different barrier energies, one being
more favorable than the other, depending on the mechanisms of the polarization switching (e.g.
uniform polarization or domain-wall motion) and the chemistry of the films (e.g. HfO 2, ZrO2, Hf1-
xZrxO2 or Hf1-xLaxO2, etc).


These two different switching pathways have been predicted to exhibit opposite sign polarization
responses, as illustrated in Figure S1. Some studies have proposed to use the sign of the
piezoelectric coefficient (d33) as a key parameter to experimentally determine the actual switching
pathway occurrent in the material7. However, this coefficient is highly dependent on strain and
film texture11, showing variation in the sign by altering the texture of the film (see Figure S2 and
S3). Thus, experimental understanding the atomic-scale mechanisms and pathways for domain
nucleation and polarization inversion remains elusive and has not yet been experimentally realized,
but is important for future material design, and imperative to properly calculate the polarization
magnitude and to utilize the material in devices that rely upon the switching and electromechanical
responses.

In this report, we induce polarization switching in oxygen-deficient HfO 2-x films in which both
polar and antipolar arrangements (e.g. collocated Pca21 and Pbca phases) coexist. The polarization
event is triggered by electron irradiation of the sample demonstrating the existence of one of the
switching pathways previously calculated in the literature.

Figure 1B and 1C show annular dark field (ADF) and differentiated differential phase contrast
(dDPC) images obtained simultaneously in one grain. ADF images do not provide information
about the oxygen sublattice position and, hence, cannot distinguish polarization direction in a
grain. However, using dDPC, it is possible to observe O and Hf atomic columns, allowing for the
identification of the spontaneous polarization, when observed along the [100] zone axis of the
Pca21 polar phase. Although along this projection, the O2 atomic columns (see Figure 1A) have
a projected distance of 0.72 Å, which is very close to the limit of the STEM resolution, the relative
position between the O2 and the Hf sublattice allows a simple determination of the polarization
along the c-axis, Pz.
Figure 1. Local polarization determination via STEM. (A) Schematic of the orthorhombic Pca21 structure viewed
along the [100] direction for two polarization directions. (B) ADF-STEM image of a HfO2-x grain viewed along the
[100] for the Pca21 orthorhombic phase. (C) dDPC-STEM image for the same region shown in A. (D) overlay of ADF
and dDPC- STEM images to highlight the oxygen columns (red) over the Hf atomic columns (light blue). Scale bar
is 0.5 nm.

Polarization switching in these materials has been demonstrated by electrical measurements using
P-E loops1, piezoresponse force microscopy12–15, and some studies using scanning electron
microscopy2,16. In the latter case, high angle annular dark-field (HAADF), and annular bright-field
(ABF) image modalities have been used to image ex-situ switching, showing a reversible
transformation between ferroelectric and antiferroelectric orthorhombic phases 2. In-situ studies,
where the electron probe is used to trigger the polarization switching, to our knowledge, have been
limited to HAADF, demonstrating ferroelastic behavior in these materials 16. However, none of
these studies offer information about the switching pathways to attain polarization reversal.

Using STEM imaging, we generate a polarization inversion event in undoped hafnium oxide
(HfO2-x17,18) by exposing the materials to a highly energetic electron beam and taking advantage
of the high oxygen deficiency, which is expected to facilitate polarization switching in these
materials19,20. The in-situ switching process is shown in supplementary information (Movie S1)
and summarized in Figure 2, where the primary unit cells, showing domain nucleation associated
with polarization inversion, are highlighted in yellow. The figure shows a set of frames during the
polarization reversal, in both dDPC (Figure 2A) and ADF (Figure 2B and 2C) image modalities.
dDPC shows the location of both hafnium and oxygen atomic columns, facilitating the observation
of the pathway taken by the oxygen atoms to reverse polarization. A qualitative analysis of the
images is performed to determine the polarization of each unit cell, by considering the relative
position of the Hf vs O atomic columns as shown in Figure S4. The results indicate a nucleation
event occurring at 99 s in the topmost left unit cells of the frame, where the atomic columns
representing the O2 oxygen ions move from the bottom of the hafnium polyhedra towards the top
of the frame (along the c-axis). Polarization switching propagates down along the same axis to
four unit cells more, and then back-switching to the initial configuration is observed after 251 s.

Although ADF does not provide information about the oxygen locations, it offers an accurate
determination of Hf-Hf interatomic projected distances to evaluate small changes in the local
lattice parameters. ADF images are overlayed with red, white, and blue lines, indicating the
projected interatomic distance between Hf-Hf atoms along the b-axis (middle panel) and c-axis
(bottom panel). The images depict an alternating pattern from short (blue) to long (red) atomic
spacing along the b-axis, characteristic of the interplanar Hf-Hf distances for the Pca21 phase
projected along the [100] direction. No significant changes of the local b-axis lattice parameters
are observed during the switching event. However, slightly larger Hf-Hf c-axis interplanar
distances are observed at the left-top corner of the image, where the polarization inversion occurs.




Figure 2. In-situ polarization switching. (A) dDPC-STEM image of a HfO2-x grain viewed along the [100] for the
Pca21 orthorhombic at 0, 99, 112, 205 and 251 s. ADF-STEM images for the same region in A, showing Hf-Hf
projected interplanar distances (B) along the b-axis and (C) along the c-axis. Scale bar is 0.5 nm.
Figure 3A shows a set of three isolated dDPC images of two unit cells, where a clear identification
of the switching pathway is observed. The initial frame at 0 s shows the oxygen atomic columns
(O2) located closer to the bottom hafnium atomic columns in the unit cell, as schematically
presented in the atomic model. After 99 s, the oxygen atoms move up in the structure, passing
through the center of the Hf polyhedra, indicating a transient distorted tetragonal-like state. Note
that the O1 atomic columns maintain their coordination and do not move during the nucleation and
switching process. Additionally, as previously highlighted, the b-axis Hf-Hf atomic distances
during the switching process do not alter significantly, maintaining the long-short pattern in the
interatomic distances along the b-axis during the entire transition, indicating that the structure is
not completely transformed into a tetragonal lattice. As time progresses, oxygen atoms continue
the same trajectory, until a complete reverse of the polarization is obtained. A detailed analysis of
the Hf-Hf interatomic distances as a function of time is presented in Figure 3B. Light blue circles
represent the Hf-Hf interplanar distances along the b-axis across the full image, while dark-blue
circles correspond to the same atomic column distance for the topmost unit cell that switches
during the experiment. Similarly, pink circles represent the Hf-Hf interplanar distances along the
c-axis across the entire field of view, while red circles depict the same distance for the unit cell
where polarization inversion occurs. On average, this unit cell has a 1.8% tensile strain along the
c-axis and 1.5% compressive along the b-axis compared to the unit-cells in the entire field of view.
However, no significant systematic variation is observed during the switching process, indicating
that the Hf sublattice maintains the initial structure before, during, and after the switching event.




Figure 3. Transient state structural characterization. (A) dDPC-STEM image at 0, 99 and 112 s of a HfO2-x grain
viewed along the [100] for the Pca21 orthorhombic phase at 0, 99, 112, 205 and 251 s. (B) Hf-Hf projected interplanar
distances along b-axis (light/dark blue circles) and c-axis (red/pink circles). The dotted lines in B indicate the Hf-Hf
distances for a reference orthorhombic Pca21 structure. Scale bar is 0.5 nm.

Our work shows experimental evidence for a switching pathway through a transient non-polar
structure that resembles a strained tetragonal phase, for highly oxygen-deficient HfO 2-x films. It is
important to note that despite our results showing the existence of such switching pathway, it does
not discard additional pathways, which may become energetically favorable from the existence of
strain fields, chemical heterogeneities (e.g., Hf1-xZrxO2 or Hf1-xLaxO2, etc.), or other types of
defects. The experimental evidence confirms the existence of one of the switching mechanisms
predicted by nudged elastic band calculations4. Importantly, confirmation of the switching
mechanism allows for new insight into domain nucleation, which necessarily requires local
polarization switching. This new fundamental knowledge of the switching pathway also may
enable development of means to reduce the coercive fields, for example through defect or strain
engineering. Such developments would provide larger margins between switching and breakdown
voltages and increases in device endurance necessary to realize ferroelectric hafnia’s widespread
use in low energy computing technologies.



Materials and Methods
A 20 nm HfO2-x film was deposited on 85 nm thick TaN bottom electrodes on (001) silicon
substrates by reactive High-power impulse magnetron sputtering (HiPIMS) with a Starfire Impulse
HiPIMS power module in conjunction with a dc power supply to deliver square voltage pulses
with a duration of 110 μs, a frequency of 200 Hz, and a magnitude of -700 V. These parameters
represent a duty cycle of 2.0 % and per-pulse peak plasma power density of 600 W/cm 2. Following
each negative high-power pulse, a +100 V positive pulse of length 200 μs was applied to the target.
Argon was used as the sputter gas, and O2 gas was used as the reactive gas. A gas flow of 15.00
sccm of argon with 1.23 sccm of O2 was controlled by electronic mass flow controllers, and the
total process pressure was controlled by a conductance flow valve located in front of the
turbomolecular pump, reaching oxygen concentrations in the background gas of 7.6%. The
substrate was grounded, continuously rotated, and not intentionally heated during deposition.
Following deposition, the film was annealed in a pure argon atmosphere (99.999% purity) in a
rapid thermal processor, Allwin 21, Heatwave 610, at 750 °C for 30 s. Additional material
properties are provided in Jaszewski, et al.17

The area detector X-ray diffraction measurement was completed using a Bruker APEXII Duo
Single Crystal X-Ray diffractometer in a reflection geometry with a collimated Cu Kα radiation
source, a fixed omega angle of 15°, and an APEXII CCD area detector. Magnesium oxide powder
was adhered to the film surface as a height reference standard.

TEM samples were prepared by a cross-sectional wedge mechanical polishing method. To
decrease the damage from the mechanical polish, final thinning was achieved by argon ion
polishing using a Gatan PIPS II instrument with sequential accelerating voltages of 2 kV, 1 kV,
and 500 V. Simultaneous annular dark field (ADF) and differential phase contrast (DPC) images
were acquired using a ThermoFisher Themis microscope operated at 200 kV, with a probe
convergence angle of 17.9 mrads and acceptance angles between and 46 – 200 mrads (ADF) and
11- 43 mrads (DPC). A set of fast-dwell-time (200 ns) frames were collected, and drift corrected
using a cross-correlation method to avoid distortions in the images. In-situ images were acquired
using a continuous acquisition over approximately 5 min at a 5 s dwell-time for 256 x 256 frames.
The images reported were averaged every 20 frames to improve the signal-to-noise ratio.
Differentiated differential phase contract (dDPC) images were obtained as the gradient of the DPC
images21.

The projected polarization was calculated by assuming two different centrosymmetric phases,
namely tetragonal P42/nmc and orthorhombic Pbcm. The displacement of oxygen anions and
hafnium cations with respect to the tetragonal or orthorhombic Pbcm reference unit cells was input
into eq. 1, which is based on the modern theory of polarization 3.

∆𝑃 =     ∑ 𝑍 ∗ 𝑟⃑      (1)

∆𝑃 is the change in polarization, e is the positive electronic charge, Ω is the unit cell volume, Z*
is the Born effective charge5, 𝑟⃑ is the displacement of the ions from one state to another, and the
subindex 𝑖 iterates along all the atoms in the structure. Note that the displacement of the Hf cations
and the O1 anions can be assigned to 𝑟⃑ = 0, and only the O2 ions are displaced (𝑟⃑ ), as shown in
Figure S1. In addition, since the change in polarization is calculated with respect to a
centrosymmetric reference structure, the resulting ∆𝑃 can be interpreted as the spontaneous
polarization of the polar phase considering the same displacement for each O2 ion. Eq. 1 can be
                       ∗
                           ⃑
simplified as 𝑃 =              , where e is the positive electronic charge, Ω is the unit cell volume,

𝑍 ∗ is the Born effective charge for O anions and 𝑟⃑    is the O2 ion displacement from the reference
structure.

All piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) measurements (see Figure S3) were conducted with
the same Budget Sensor Multi75E-G AFM probe (Cr/Pt coated, ~3 N/m) using an Oxford
Instruments Cypher atomic force microscope. Band excitation PFM was achieved via connection
to an arbitrary wave generator and data acquisition electronics powered by a National Instruments
fast DAQ card. A custom software program was employed to generate the probing signal and
record local piezoresponse and hysteresis loops. Band excitation PFM measurements were
performed at a frequency range of 300-400 kHz and amplitude of 1 V. Simple harmonic oscillator
fits were subsequently applied to the collected spectra to extract amplitude and phase information
at the resonance frequency.




Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported by the Center for 3D Ferroelectric Microelectronics
(3DFeM), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office
of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences Energy Frontier Research Centers program under
Award Number DE-SC0021118. S.T.J. acknowledges support from the U.S. National Science
Foundation’s Graduate Research Fellowship Program under grant DGE-1842490. The authors
acknowledge the use of the Materials Characterization Facility at Carnegie Mellon University
supported by grant MCF-677785. This work utilized a Bruker D8 Venture instrument, which was
acquired under Award CHE-2018870 from the U.S. National Science Foundation’s Major
Research Instrumentation program.

References

1. Böscke, T. S., Müller, J., Bräuhaus, D., Schröder, U. & Böttger, U. Ferroelectricity in hafnium

  oxide thin films. Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 102903 (2011).
2. Cheng, Y. et al. Reversible transition between the polar and antipolar phases and its

  implications for wake-up and fatigue in HfO2-based ferroelectric thin film. Nat. Commun. 13,

  645 (2022).

3. Physics of ferroelectrics: a modern perspective. (Springer, 2007).

4. Yuan, J.-H. et al. Ferroelectricity in HfO 2 from a Coordination Number Perspective. Chem.

  Mater. 35, 94–103 (2023).

5. Wu, Y. et al. Unconventional polarization switching mechanism in (Hf, Zr)O2 ferroelectrics.

  (2023) doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2301.06248.

6. Calderon, S. et al. Atomic-scale polarization switching in wurtzite ferroelectrics. Science 380,

  1034–1038 (2023).

7. Qi, Y., Reyes-Lillo, S. E. & Rabe, K. M. ‘Double-path’ ferroelectrics and the sign of the

  piezoelectric response. (2022) doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2204.06999.

8. Silva, A. et al. Unraveling the ferroelectric switching mechanisms in ferroelectric pure and La

  doped HfO2 epitaxial thin films. Mater. Today Phys. 34, 101064 (2023).

9. Clima, S. et al. Identification of the ferroelectric switching process and dopant-dependent

  switching properties in orthorhombic HfO2: A first principles insight. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104,

  092906 (2014).

10.    Maeda, T., Magyari-Kope, B. & Nishi, Y. Identifying Ferroelectric Switching Pathways

  in HfO2: First Principles Calculations under Electric Fields. in 2017 IEEE International

  Memory Workshop (IMW) 1–4 (IEEE, 2017). doi:10.1109/IMW.2017.7939087.

11.    Dutta, S. et al. Piezoelectricity in hafnia. Nat. Commun. 12, 7301 (2021).

12.    Buragohain, P. et al. Nanoscopic studies of domain structure dynamics in ferroelectric

  La:HfO2 capacitors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 222901 (2018).
13.   Chernikova, A. et al. Ultrathin Hf 0.5 Zr 0.5 O 2 Ferroelectric Films on Si. ACS Appl.

  Mater. Interfaces 8, 7232–7237 (2016).

14.   Kelley, K. P. et al. Ferroelectricity in hafnia controlled via surface electrochemical state.

  Nat. Mater. 22, 1144–1151 (2023).

15.   Hsain, H. A. et al. Enhanced piezoelectricity of thin film hafnia-zirconia (HZO) by

  inorganic flexible substrates. Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 022905 (2018).

16.   Zheng, Y. et al. Direct atomic-scale visualization of the 90° domain walls and their

  migrations in Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 ferroelectric thin films. Mater. Today Nano 24, 100406 (2023).

17.   Jaszewski, S. T. et al. Impact of oxygen content on phase constitution and ferroelectric

  behavior of hafnium oxide thin films deposited by reactive high-power impulse magnetron

  sputtering. Acta Mater. 239, 118220 (2022).

18.   Ihlefeld, J. F., Jaszewski, S. T. & Fields, S. S. A Perspective on ferroelectricity in hafnium

  oxide: Mechanisms and considerations regarding its stability and performance. Appl. Phys.

  Lett. 121, 240502 (2022).

19.   Zhou, Y. et al. The effects of oxygen vacancies on ferroelectric phase transition of HfO2-

  based thin film from first-principle. Comput. Mater. Sci. 167, 143–150 (2019).

20.   Lee, K. et al. Enhanced ferroelectric switching speed of Si-doped HfO2 thin film tailored

  by oxygen deficiency. Sci. Rep. 11, 6290 (2021).

21.   Lazić, I., Bosch, E. G. T. & Lazar, S. Phase contrast STEM for thin samples: Integrated

  differential phase contrast. Ultramicroscopy 160, 265–280 (2016).
Supplementary information

Atomic scale observation of ferroelectric switching pathways in ferroelectric hafnium
oxide.
Sebastian Calderon V1, Samantha T. Jaszewski2, Kyle P. Kelley3, Jon F. Ihlefeld2,4, and Elizabeth
Dickey1
1
 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213, USA
2
 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia 22904, USA
3
 Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN
37831, USA
4 Charles L. Brown Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Charlottesville,
Virginia 22904, USA




Figure S1. Alternative switching pathways. Two centrosymmetric phases have been identified
to allow polarization switching in HfO2 by using DFT calculation4. A tetragonal P42/nmc and an
orthorhombic Pbcm. Both paths require opposite oxygen pathways to reverse the polarization,
which results in opposite sign of the polarization.
Figure S2. Piezoelectric effective coefficient d33, eff as a function of the texture of the films.
Using the equation reported in 11, it is shown that the sign of d33, eff can vary depending on the
texture of the films. (A) show the calculated value for d33, eff changing the texture of the films from
a pure 111 texture to ± 40 degrees. The results show negative to positive value depending on the
degree of texture. (B) 2D X-ray diffraction scan for the samples presented in this manuscript,
showing a 111 preferential orientation.
Figure S3. Band excitation piezoresponse force microscopy. Average band excitation
piezoresponse force microscopy off-field phase (top panels) and amplitude (bottom panels)
hysteresis loops acquired on (A,B) PbTiO3, (C,D) HfO2, and (E,F) PVDF. Note, the sign of the
piezoelectric coefficient determines PFM phase switching handedness, i.e. clockwise and counter
clockwise phase rotation for positive and negative d33, respectively. PbTiO3 has a positive d33,
while PVDF has negative d33.




Figure S4. Experimental nucleation and switching pathways.
