An optical diffractive deep neural network with
multiple frequency-channels
Yingshi Chen1, Jinfeng Zhu1
1 Institute of Electromagnetics and Acoustics, and Department of Electronic Science, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China

E-mail: gsp@grusoft.com

Abstract
Diffractive deep neural network (DNNet) is a novel machine learning framework on the modulation of optical transmission. Diffractive
network would get predictions at the speed of light. It's pure passive architecture, no additional power consumption. We improved the
accuracy of diffractive network with optical waves at different frequency. Each layers have multiple frequency-channels (optical distributions
at different frequency). These channels are merged at the output plane to get final output. The experiment in the fasion-MNIST and EMNIST
datasets showed multiple frequency-channels would increase the accuracy a lot. We also give detailed analysis to show the difference between
DNNet and MLP. The modulation process in DNNet is actually optical activation function. We develop an open source package ONNet.
The source codes are available at https://github.com/closest-git/ONNet.

Keywords: machine learning, optical neural network, multiple frequency channel, optical activation function

1. Introduction
   Diffractive deep neural network(DNNet)[1,2] is a novel machine learning framework on the physical principles of optics,
which is still in its infancy and shows great potential. DNNet tries to find optimal modulation parameters to change the phase,
amplitude or other physical variable of optical wave propagation. So in the final output plane, the optical distribution has special
pattern which is the indicator of object’s class or value. DNNet tries to extract features from the wave distribution in the three
dimensional space, which is fundamentally different from the images, audios or videos. The learning of wave propagation has
hardly been studied in machine learning. This is a new subject. DNNet opens new doors for the machine learning.
   If must have to pick a reference, the most similar tool in the machine learning is multiple layer perceptron (MLP) [10]. [1]
gives some comparison between the structure of diffractive neural networks and electronic networks, which is actually MLP.
As we showed in section 2, there are still many big differences. Compared to more complex deep convolution neural networks
(CNN), DNNet lacks more key features: 1) No convolution layers. 2) No batch normalization or other normalization module.
3) No pooling layers. There are some ways to implement more complex optical neural networks, which have optical
normalization layers and optical pooling layers (We will discuss this in the following papers). But the first point is the key
difference. There’s no sign how to add some optical kernels to learn the various details and hierarchical features of input images.
So learning ability of DNNet is much weak than CNN, which is also verified by our testing results. Even in the tiny fashion-
MNIST and EMNIST [19] datasets, the performance is not satisfactory. So there is long way for the DNNet to catch up with
his cousin, deep MLP or deep CNN.
   In this article, we present a new diffractive network with multiple frequency-channels (MF_DNet). We define frequency
channel as the optical distribution corresponding to a certain frequency at each layer. As figure 1 showes, we use optical waves
at different frequency to get more frequency-channels. Then we merge these channels to get final result at the output layer.
Experiments show that this method improves the accuracy. The D2NNet in [1] is the simplest MF_DNet. Or MF_DNet with
only one channel.
   For the simulation of optical neural networks, we developed ONNet. It’s an open-source Python/C++ package and the codes
are available at https://github.com/closest-git/ONNet. ONNet implements diffractive layer on the module of pytorch [15],
which is one of the best deep learning frameworks. With the powerful automatic differentiation [17] in pytorch, it’s easy to get
the gradient for all operations in the complex diffractive process. For example, the fast Fourier transform (FFT) and inverse
FFT operator, which is the key operator for the numerical simulation of diffractive process. The main disadvantage of pytorch
is the lack of support for complex tensors. ONNet implemented various complex-number tensor operations. As mentioned
above, DNNet is not CNN, so ONNet has not use any convolution layers in the current release.
                  Figure 1 MF_DNet - Diffractive deep neural network with multiple frequecncy-channels

    So the main contributions of this paper are as follows. 1) A detailed and in-depth analysis of DNNet’s structure. We
compared the similarity and difference between DNNet and MLP. The modulation process in DNNet is actually optical
activation function. 2) We present MF_DNet, which improve DNNet with multi-frequency channels. The more channels, the
higher accuracy. 3) An open source package ONNet that will bring a lot of help to the simulation of optical neural networks.

2. Analysis of DNNet
  For the wave from ith pixel in the lth layer, formula (1) defines its distribution in the three dimensional space.
                                       𝑙       𝑝−𝑝𝑖        1      1         𝑗2𝜋𝑟
                                      𝜔𝑖,𝑝 =          (         + ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (          )       (1)
                                                𝑟2        2𝜋𝑟    𝑗𝜆          𝜆
  Where 𝑟 is distance between the point 𝑝 and 𝑝𝑖 ; 𝑗 = √−1; 𝜆 is the wavelength.

   For the detail proof of formula (1), please see [1]. DNNet uses stacked layers to adjust the propagation of optical waves. As
figure 1 showes, each pixel in each diffractive layer(including input and oupt layer) has different modulation parameters. They
will change the amplitude and phase value of optical waves. So in the final output layer , there are special optical pattern. Some
regions are more brighter than other regions. By adjusting these parameters, we can change the position of brighter regions. To
use these patterns as the indicator of class number, we must solve a very difficult optimazation probem. Machine learnig is a
poweful tool for this problem. And experiments verified that we do find possible solution with acceptable accuracy. This
stacked multilayers are similar to the structure of MLP, but there are still many big differences.
   To compare classical multiple layer perceptron (MLP) and DNNet, we first give some concise definition of MLP. Let
complex function 𝑓(𝑥; 𝜃) is the target function parameterized by θ in complex space ℂ . Given training data D =
{(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ), 𝑖 = 1,2, ⋯ , 𝑀} where x denotes the input and y the class number. A MLP try to learn the function 𝑓(𝑥; 𝜃) by neural
network usually consists of stacked layers. The learned model should fit the training data well and have good generalization in
the testing data. Let L denotes the total number of layers and 𝑙 ∈ {1,2, ⋯ , 𝐿}, formula (2) defines the transformation in the
classical MLP, which consists of a linear mapping 𝑍 𝑙 = (𝑊 𝑙 )𝑇 ℎ𝑙−1 + 𝑏 𝑙 and followed by an element-wise nonlinearity
activation function: ℎ𝑙 = ∅(𝑧 𝑙 ).
                                                          ℎ𝑙 = ∅(𝑧 𝑙 )
                                                  { 𝑙         𝑙−1 𝑙−1              (2)
                                                   𝑧𝑖 = ∑𝑘 𝑤𝑘,𝑖  ℎ𝑘 + 𝑏 𝑙
                                                    𝑙−1 𝑙
                                                  𝑤𝑘,𝑖 , 𝑏 ∈ ℂ𝑛 are learnable parameters
   Formula (3) defines transformation in the DNNet [1, 2].




                                                                      2
                                                      ℎ𝑖𝑙 = 𝑡𝑖𝑙 𝑧𝑖𝑙
                                                   𝑙         𝑙−1 𝑙−1
                                                 {𝑧𝑖 = ∑𝑘 𝜔𝑘,𝑖     ℎ𝑘                         (3)
                                                  𝑡𝑖 = 𝑎𝑖 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑗𝜙𝑖𝑙 )
                                                    𝑙     𝑙

   where
                                                𝑙       𝑝−𝑝𝑖        1         1      𝑗2𝜋𝑟
                                               𝜔𝑖,𝑝 =          (         + ) 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (          ) are constants for the wave propagation
                                                         𝑟2        2𝜋𝑟        𝑗𝜆𝜆
                                                𝑎𝑖𝑙 (amplitude), 𝜙𝑖𝑙 (the pahse value ) are learnable parameters

   Compare formula (2) and formula (3), we could see three differences.
                                                                                   𝑙−1
   1) The difference meaning of transfer matrix 𝑊 𝑙 . In the case of DNNet, 𝜔𝑘,𝑖       is not learnable parameters, just some constants
from the numerical simulation of wave propagation. In fact, ONNnet package calculate these parameters before the training
process. And reuse these values to reduce computation time. So for each hidden layer with N neurons, MLP has N × N
parameters, while DDnet has only 2N parameters. In some implementions, 𝑎𝑖𝑙 is always 1 and only 𝜙𝑖𝑙 are adjustable parameters,
so only N parameters in this case.
   2) DNNet has special activation function. That is, ℎ𝑖𝑙 = 𝑡𝑖𝑙 𝑧𝑖𝑙 is an optical activation defined in the complex space. [1] declares
 𝑙
𝑡𝑖 is something like bias item. But we think that it just special activation functions. In fact, we can add extra bias item as
discussed in the next point.
   3) No bias item 𝑏 𝑙 . We have tried to add bias item 𝑏 𝑙 in the DNNet, that is,
                                     ℎ𝑖𝑙 = 𝑡𝑖𝑙 𝑧𝑖𝑙 + 𝑏 𝑙 .
But no significant change in the accuracy. We would give detailed analysis in the following paper.

3. Diffractive network with multiple frequency-channels
   For each diffractive layers, there are different optical distribution at different frequency. We call these optical distributions
as frequency-channels, just like different channels in the CNN. It’s well knowned that deep CNN would get higher accuracy
with more channels. So we get similar results in the DNNet, higher accuracy with more frequency-channels.
   At the output layer, we get frequency-channel at different frequncy. Then we merge these channels to get final result with
weighting coefficient. The loss function is defined in formula (4).
                                    Loss = 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠(∑ 𝑤𝑓 × 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙 )                             (4)
   where
         𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 is the function to get classification error. For exsample, cross entropy function or mean squared error.
         𝑤𝑓 is the weighting coefficient for each 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙, which is also learned by MF_DNET.

   The following is the detail of training and predicting algorithm.
                                                  Algorithm 1 Training algorithm

                        1 Pick some frequencies in specified range
                        2 for each frequency
                               Get the frequency-channel at each layer
                               At output plane, get modulus for each frequency-channel
                        3 Sum up all output modulus with the weighting coefficient
                        4 Get loss by the formula (4)
                        5 Get gradient from the loss function and call back-propagation to improve the model
                        6 finish training, save the model




                                                                          3
                                          Algorithm 2 Predicting algorithm for input image

                        1 Load trained model for each frequency
                        2 For each model
                              Get the frequency-channel at each layer
                              At output plane, get modulus for each frequency-channel
                        3 Sum up all output modulus with the weighting coefficient
                        4 Call cross-entropy classification function to get output vector
                        5 The class number is the index corresponding to maximum value

  As figure 1 showes, there are some modifications to implement MF_DNet. At the input layer, we transmit different optical
 pulse one by one. The output layer need an extra optical accumulator to merge the signals at different channels. MF_DNet
 still retains the advantage of DNNet. That is, MF_DNet would get predictions at the speed of light. It's pure passive
 architecture, no additional power consumption.

3. Results and discussion
   We tested MF_DNet on two MNIST-like datasets(fasion-MNIST, EMNIST[19]), which is harder than MNIST. MNIST is
the simplest testing datasets in image classification problems. It’s so trivial that nearly no machine learning teams will use
MNIST as testing dataset. Since DNNet has good accuary of in MNIST(higher than 90%) [1] , we should test it by more
complex datasets. fasion-MNIST consists of a training set consisting of 60000 examples belonging to 10 different classes and
a test set of 10000 examples. Figure 2 showes some pictures of fasion-MNIST. EMNIST is a set of handwritten character digits
derived from the NIST Special Database 19. We use the “balanced” split of EMNIST which has 47 classes. Figure 3 showes
some pictures of EMNIST.
   Figure 4 is the learning curves on fasion-MNIST. Figure 5 is the learning curves on EMNIST. It’s clear that with more
frequency channels, MF_DNet would get much higher accuracy than standard DDNet. In the case fasion-MNIST, the accuracy
increased from 73% to 85%. In the case EMNIST, the accuracy increased from 50% to 73%.
   In the case of EMNIST, we must admit the performance on the EMNIST is poor (only 73%). But this is not the question.
Just as said in the start of this article, diffractive is still in its infancy. With more structures and algorithms, we are sure there
will be a great improvement. Just like the RELU, batch normalization, drop out…, these algorithms improve the accuracy of
deep CNN drastically.




         Figure 2 fasion-MNIST datasets (10 classes)                        Figure 3 EMNIST datasets(47 classes)




     Figure 4 The learning cuvers on fasion-MNIST                     Figure 5 The learning cuvers on EMNIST




                                                                  4
4 Conclusions
  We give some in-depth analysis of DNNet’s structure. We clarify that modulation process in DNNet is actually optical
 activation function. We improve the accuracy of DNNet with multiple frequency-channels. We released a new open source
 package ONNet. The main object of ONNet is to help people to simulation and study of optical neural networks. As verified
 by some datasets, the learning ability of DNNet is still weak. We need more structures and algorithms to improve its ability.
 Multiple frequency-channels is a effective algorithm for this task. And ONNet is a high performance and user-friendly package
 for more study and trials.

  References
[1] Lin, Xing, et al. "All-optical machine learning using diffractive deep neural networks." Science 361.6406 (2018): 1004-1008.
[2] Luo, Yi, et al. "Design of task-specific optical systems using broadband diffractive neural networks." Light: Science & Applications 8.1
    (2019): 1-14.
[3] Wei, Haiqing, et al. "Comment on All-optical machine learning using diffractive deep neural networks." arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1809.08360 (2018).
[4] Mengu, Deniz, et al. "Response to Comment on" All-optical machine learning using diffractive deep neural networks"." arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1810.04384 (2018).
[5] Colburn, Shane, et al. "Optical frontend for a convolutional neural network." Applied optics 58.12 (2019): 3179-3186.
[6] Zuo, Ying, et al. "All Optical Neural Network with Nonlinear Activation Functions." arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10819 (2019).
[7] Mengu, Deniz, et al. "Analysis of diffractive optical neural networks and their integration with electronic neural networks." IEEE
    Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics (2019).
[8] Zheng, Shuiqin, et al. "Orthogonality of Diffractive Deep Neural Networks." arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03370 (2018).
[9] Chang, Julie, et al. "Hybrid optical-electronic convolutional neural networks with optimized diffractive optics for image classification."
    Scientific reports 8.1 (2018): 12324.1
[10] Bishop, Christopher M. Pattern recognition and machine learning. springer, 2006.
[11] LeCun, Yann, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. "Deep learning." nature 521.7553 (2015): 436-444.
[12] Bottou, Léon. "Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent." Proceedings of COMPSTAT'2010. Physica-Verlag
    HD, 2010. 177-186.
[13] Rumelhart, David E., Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. "Learning representations by back-propagating errors." nature
    323.6088 (1986): 533.
[14] Abadi, Martín, et al. "Tensorflow: A system for large-scale machine learning." 12th {USENIX} Symposium on Operating Systems
    Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 16). 2016.
[15] Paszke, Adam, et al. "PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library." Advances in Neural Information
    Processing Systems. 2019.
[16] Deng, Jia, et al. "Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database." 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
    recognition. Ieee, 2009.
[17] Paszke, Adam, et al. "Automatic differentiation in pytorch." (2017).
[18] ONNnet: https://github.com/closest-git/ONNet
[19] Cohen, Gregory, et al. "EMNIST: an extension of MNIST to handwritten letters." arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.05373 (2017).
[20] Goodman, Joseph W. Introduction to Fourier optics. Roberts and Company Publishers, 2005.




                                                                      5
